<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01//EN"
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/strict.dtd">
<html>
<head>
<title>Cytogenetics and Population Genetics:  Genetics 100B</title>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1" />
<link href="../style/std.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
<link href="ucdlectures.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
<style type="text/css">
  th.empty {background:none;border:none}
  span.punnett-fraction {font:normal 80%  "Times New Roman","Times Roman",Times,serif;}
  table.punnett {border:1px solid black;margin:0 auto 1em auto;}
  table.punnett caption {font:normal 75% Bookman,Palatino,Century,serif;
    color:white;background-color:#444;}
  table.punnett th, table.punnett td {text-align:center;}
  th.punnett-sex {border:none;background-color:#e8e8ff;
			font:bold 75% monospace!important; text-align:center;
      vertical-align:middle;}

  .no-spacing li {margin-top:0;}
</style>
</head>
<body>

<p id="subtitle">
Genetics 100B
<br />
Part 2 of 2
</p>

<p id="title">
Population Genetics
</p>

<hr />

<p>
This is part 2 of two parts.  The first part is on cytogenetics, covering 
chromosome number and structural abnormalities.
</p><p>
Note that it appears some lectures had their notes recorded on something other
than the spiral notebook, and those notes, unfortunately, are missing.
</p>

<p class="date">
12 Feb 1980</p>

<h1>Hardy-Weinberg Theorem (cont.)</h1>
<p>
Laws for Equilibrium
</p><p>
In order to have equilibrium, certain assumptions must be made:
</p>
<ol style="list-style-type:lower-roman;">
<li>no mutation
<li>no migration
<li>no selection
<li>no small populations
<li>no preferential mating
</ol>
<p>
The first three specify how allele frequencies and genotype frequencies change.
</p><p>
In reality, equilibrium is not obtained because these assumptions necessary for
equilibrium are not met.  The following specify the violations.

<h2>Violation of Equilibrium</h2>
<p>
<b>Mutation</b>.  Mutation always occur because DNA replication dynamics is 
never observed to be perfect.  Therefore, allelic frequencies will change.
</p><p>
Suppose two alleles A<sub>1</sub> and A<sub>2</sub>.
[equation]
</p><p>
The life cycle being with generation <i>t</i> with zygotes and allele frequency
<i>q<sub>t</sub></i>.
[figure]
</p><p>
Random mating does not change allele frequency but mutations do.  The rate
of conversion between alleles is seen here.  <i>q<sub>t</sub></i>&prime; =
<i>q</i><sub><i>t</i> + 1</sub> because of gametic allelic frequency.

[figure]
</p><p>
A mutation should be considered a rare event.  Also <i>q<sub>t</sub></i>&prime;
does not differ from <i>q<sub>t</sub></i>.  Typical, the mutation rate
&mu; will be 10<sup>&minus;5</sup> or 10<sup>&minus;6</sup>, which is 1 
event in 100,000 or 1 million events, or in the case of DNA, 1 base in 
100,000 or 1 million bases.
</p><p>
Now suppose a mutation occurs mostly in one direction.  If [math symbol], that is
if <i>A</i><sub>1</sub> mostly goes to <i>A</i><sub>2</sub>, and less from 
<i>A</i><sub>2</sub> to <i>A</i><sub>1</sub>, then <i>q<sub>t</sub></i> 
= <i>f</i>(<i>A</i><sub>2</sub>) = 1.  If the populations begins with all
alleles being <i>A</i><sub>2</sub>, or <i>q</i><sub>0</sub> = 1), then with a
mutation rate still regarding <i>A</i><sub>2</sub> &rarr; <i>A</i><sub>1</sub>,
then <i>q</i><sub>1</sub> &lt; 1.
</p>
<p class="date">
14 Feb 1980
</p>

<p class="date">
19 Feb 1980
</p>

<p class="date">
21 Feb 1980
</p>

<p class="date">
26 Feb 1980
</p>

<p class="date">
4 Mar 1980
</p>

<p class="date">
6 Mar 1980
</p>

<p class="date">
12 Mar 1980
</p>

<p class="date">
13 Mar 1980
</p>


</body>
</html>

