<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<!-- Centrifuge calculations -->
<head>
<title>Centrifuge Calculations</title>
<style type="text/css">
/* centrifuge styles */
  .headings { padding-right:0.5em;text-align:right;color:blue;
             font:bold 90% Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif;padding-left:0.5em;}
  .units {font:normal 80% Tahoma,Arial,sans-serif;width:16em;}
  .subtitle { text-align:center;
		font: bold 150% Tahoma,Arial,sans-serif; color:green;}
	#centform {font-size:140%;}
 .eqnserif, .eqnserif td { background:none;text-align:center;padding:0;
     font:normal 110% 'Times New Roman','Times Roman',Times,serif;}
 .numer {border-bottom:1px solid black;}
 .overbar {border-top:1px solid black;}
  .tablerow {border-top:1px solid black;border-bottom:1px solid black;}
  #selected-rotor {padding-left:1em;color:purple;display:none;
				font:normal 90% Palatino,Tahoma,Arial,sans-serif;}
	#radius-type-header {display:none;padding:0.25em 0.5em;vertical-align:top;
     font:normal 75% 'Times New Roman','Times Roman',Times,serif;}
  #radius-types {font:normal 100% Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif;margin-top:0.5em;}
</style>
</head>

<body>
<div id="centrifuge-page">

<!--  Main Table for Calculations  -->
<form id="centform" action="#">
<!-- input rows  -->
<table>
<tr>
 <td class="headings" rowspan="2">
   <span id="radius-header" onmouseover="this.style.color='red';"
			onmouseout="this.style.color='blue';" title="click here for explanation"
			onclick="showAvgradHelp();">Average radius of rotor</span>: </td>
 <td rowspan="2"><div class="errorborder" id="radiuserror"><input
   type="text" id="rotorradius" size="6" maxlength="6" 
   class="numvalue" onchange="Centrifuge.setCentFactor(this);" /></div> </td>
 <td class="units" rowspan="2">
   <input type="radio" name="radiusdim" value="mm" checked="checked" />mm <br />
   <input type="radio" name="radiusdim" value="cm" />cm  <br />
   <input type="radio" name="radiusdim" value="in" />inches  </td>
 <td><button type="button" onclick="Centrifuge.selectRotor();">Select A
   Rotor</button></td>
 <td id="selected-rotor">&nbsp;</td></tr>
<tr><td id="radius-type-header" rowspan="3" colspan="2">
  <span style="font:normal 90% Tahoma,Arial,Helvetica,sans-serif;color:brown;">Optionally 
		choose another radius parameter:</span>
  <div id="radius-types"></div>   </td></tr>        
<tr class="tablerow">
 <td class="headings">Relative Centrifugal Force (RCF): </td>
 <td><div class="errorborder" id="rcferror"><input type="text" name="RCF" size="6"
   maxlength="6" class="numvalue" onchange="Centrifuge.setCentFactor(this);" /></div> </td>
 <td class="units">&times; <i>g</i> </td> </tr>
<tr class="tablerow">
 <td class="headings">Speed (Angular Velocity):  </td>
 <td><div class="errorborder" id="speederror"><input type="text" name="angularvel"
   size="6" maxlength="6" class="numvalue"
   onchange="Centrifuge.setCentFactor(this);" /></div> </td>
 <td class="units">
  <input type="radio" name="speedim" value="rpm" checked="checked" />revolutions / minute (rpm) <br />
  <input type="radio" name="speedim" value="rps" />revolutions / second (rps) <br />
  <input type="radio" name="speedim" value="radps" />radians / second  </td></tr>
</table>

<table style="margin:0 auto;font:normal 80% Tahoma,Arial,Helvetica,sans-serif;">
 <tr><td>
  <table style="border:2px solid black;margin:0 3em 0 0;background-color:#ffd8ff;">
  <tr><td style="padding:0 3em 0 1em;"><button type="button" 
        onclick="Centrifuge.centCalc();">Press To Update</button> </td>
	<td style="width:16em;text-align:right;font:bold 83% Arial,sans-serif;margin:0;color:#050;">
    Select the one result desired if the other two are given:  </td>
  <td style="padding:0 1em;">
   <input type="radio" name="updatefactor" value="radius" />radius<br />
   <input type="radio" name="updatefactor" value="rcf" />RCF<br />
   <input type="radio" name="updatefactor" value="speed" checked="checked" />speed </td></tr>
  </table> </td>
  <td><button type="reset" onclick="clearCent();">Clear All</button> </td></tr>
</table>

</form>

 <table style="display:none;">
 <tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
  <div id="instructions"
   style="margin-right:1em;font:normal 70% Verdana,Garamond,Helvetica,sans-serif;
     visibility:hidden;background-color:#fff0f0;
	 border:1px solid #d55;padding:0.75em;">
<a id="centinstruct" name="centinstruct">Select</a>
the units/dimensions first, then enter the value in a box.  If a value
is first entered in a box, and then the unit/dimension for that value is
selected or changed, then the value will automatically be converted.
A value entered into a box after units/dimensions are changed will
not change the value, of course.
<p>
The radius of the rotor is never calculated.  A speed for the centrifuge
(in revolutions per minute, revolutions per second, or radian per second)
is calculated if values for the radius and relative centrifugal force (RCF)
are entered, and either one of those has its value changed.  An RCF
is calculated if values for the radius and speed are entered, and either
one of those has its values changed. </p>
<p>
In the course of entering a value in a box, use of the TAB or
ENTER/RETURN keys or movement of the focus/cursor with
the mouse will cause an update operation (calculation), if appropriate,
with the value entered to be used in the calculation. </p>
	<p style="margin-top:0.5em;text-align:right;">
		<input type="button" onclick="hide_centhelp();" name="hide_centhelp"
		value="Thanks" style="color:green;background-color:#cec;" /></p>
		</div></td>
	<td style="vertical-align:top;">
	<div id="avgradiushelp"
		style="font:normal 70% Verdana,Garamond,Helvetica,sans-serif;
		background-color:#f0f0ff;border:1px solid #55d;visibility:hidden;
		padding:0.75em;">
<a id="radiushelp" name="radiushelp">The average radius is the
distance from the center</a>
of rotation to the point in the tube/container where the sample is
most likely to be found from the rotational center.
<p>
For cylindrical container (tube), the sample at the top of the tube
may be closer to the sample at the bottom of the tube.  Since the
force experienced by the sample depends up the radial distance from
the center (radius), if the top of the tube is positioned a shorter
distance than the bottom of the tube, sample at the top of the tube
(at the minimum radius) experiences less of a force than sample at
the bottom of the tube (at the maximum radius).  This is especially the
case for a swinging-bucket or -carrier type of centrifuge, as the tube
swings into its position during the run.  For fixed-angle rotors, there
is less of a distance between the minimum and maximum radii, and so the
force throughout the sample is more uniform. </p>
<p>
The practical average radius of a swinging bucket type of rotor where
the midpoint of the container's length is the pivot point is the radius
to the pivot point.  For a fixed-angle rotor, the average radius is the
midpoint between the minimum and maximum radius.  A little trigonometry
solves this problem.  If <i>&theta;</i> represents the angle of the rotor
well (tube) from the horizontal toward the center, <i>r</i><sub>max</sub>
is the maximal radius of the rotor well, <i>r</i><sub>min</sub> is the
minimal radius of the well, and <i>r</i><sub>avg</sub> is the average
radius (the value desired), then the following equations are true:</p>
<p style="margin-left:2em;">
(rotor well length) &times; <b>cos</b> <i>&theta;</i> =
 <i>r</i><sub>max</sub> &minus; <i>r</i><sub>min</sub> </p>
 <p>
Note that &frac12; &times; (rotor well length) represents the midpoint
of the length of the rotor well, a point that is <i>r</i><sub>avg</sub>: </p>
<p style="margin-left:2em;">
&frac12; &times; (rotor well length) &times; <b>cos</b> <i>&theta;</i> =
<i>r</i><sub>avg</sub> </p>
<p>
<i>r</i><sub>avg</sub> can be solved in terms of <i>r</i><sub>min</sub>
and <i>r</i><sub>max</sub>: </p>
<p style="margin-left:2em;">
(rotor well length) &times; <b>cos</b> <i>&theta;</i> = 2 &times;
<i>r</i><sub>avg</sub> = <i>r</i><sub>max</sub> &minus;
<i>r</i><sub>min</sub> <br />
<i>r</i><sub>avg</sub> = &frac12; &times; (<i>r</i><sub>max</sub>
&minus; <i>r</i><sub>min</sub>)  </p>
<p>
Hence <i>r</i><sub>avg</sub> is just the midpoint of the distance between
<i>r</i><sub>min</sub> and <i>r</i><sub>max</sub>. </p>
<p style="margin-top:0.5em;">
<input type="button" onclick="hide_avgradhelp();" name="hide_avgradhelp"
value="Thanks" style="color:blue;background-color:#cce;" /> </p>
</div> </td></tr>
</table>

</div> <!-- id=centrifuge-page -->
</body>
</html>