<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<!-- ============================
         General Assay / Calibration Curve Calculations
	============================ -->
<head>
<title>Dilutions Calculations</title>
<!-- ============================
           Dilutions
	============================ -->

<style type="text/css">
  #dilntbl, #beckman-table {background-color:#eee;width:100%;}
  #dilntbl th, #beckman-table th {background-color:#fff8f8; text-align:right;
       font:bold 90% Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif;padding:0.1em 0.5em; }
  #dilntbl td, #beckman-table td {background-color:#f8fff8;
       font:bold 105% Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif; }
	#example-step-2, #example-step-3 {color:red;
				font:normal 100% Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif;margin-left:2em;}
</style>
</head>
<body>

<div id="dilutions-page">
 <button id="dilutions-instructions">Instructions?</button>
  <!-- click = dilutions instructions -->

<form id="dilnform" action="#">
<!--   The dilution factors input table  -->

<table id="dilntbl">
<tr id="promptrow">
 <td colspan="4" style="text-align:right;vertical-align:middle;">
  <div style="float:left;text-align:left;color:green;
   font:bold 150% 'Times New Roman','Times Roman',Times,serif;">
  Enter the required values below<br />
  <a href="#help" style="font:bold 70% Arial,Helvetica,sans-serif;">More
    help, please</a>
	  &nbsp;&nbsp;
    <button type="button" id="dilution-example">Show	An Example</button>
    <!-- click="Dilutions.dilnExample(this);return false;" -->
      <span style="display:none;" id="example-step-2">Now click the
        <b>How is it done?</b> button</span>
      <span style="display:none;" id="example-step-3">Now reset/clear the form
					with the <b>reset</b> button</span>
  </div>
    <button type="reset">reset</button><br />
  <!-- onclick="Dilutions.resetDilution(this);" -->
 <div style="margin-top:0.5em;float:right;">
  <input type="checkbox" name="practice" value="yes" id="dilutions-practice" />
     <!--   onclick="Dilutions.willPractice(this);"  -->
  <span style="font-size:70%;">Check&nbsp;this&nbsp;box
  if&nbsp;you&nbsp;are&nbsp;practicing these&nbsp;calculations<br />
  and want to provide your own answer</span>
 </div></td></tr>
<tr><th>Enter here the <span class="dilnconcword">concentration</span>
	of the substance in the
  <span class="dilnsolntypewords">stock&nbsp;(more&nbsp;concentrated)</span>
  solution and select&nbsp;the&nbsp;units:</th>
 <td><input class="inputvalue" type="text" maxlength="6" size="6"
    name="stockConcentrationValue" /></td>
 <td id="dilution-concentrations"></td>
 <td style="width:30%;vertical-align:top;padding:0 0 0.5em 0.5em;" rowspan="6">
 <div style="float:right;">
 <input style="font:bold 105% Arial,Helvetica,sans-serif;margin-bottom:0.5em;"
  type="button" value="How is it done?" id="calc-diln"/>
</div>
  <!--  onclick="Dilutions.calcDiln(this.form);return(false);" -->
<!-- the guide and error and practice boxes -->
   <div id="dilnerror" class="errors" style="clear:both;"></div>
   <div id="dilnreport" style="display:none;clear:both;">
    <div id="dilnguide" style="border:1px solid maroon;padding:0.5em;
	 font:normal 100% Verdana,Helvetica,sans-serif;"></div>
	<!--
     <br><input type="button" name="printbox" value="Give me a printable version"
      style="margin-top:1em;" onclick="printable(this.form.guide.value)"><br>
      <span style="font-size:75%;"><span style="color:red;">Note</span>:
			Pressing this button opens a new window</span> -->
    </div>
    <div id="pracanswer" style="margin-top:2em;color:blue;"></div>
 </td></tr>
<tr><th>Enter the <span class="dilnconcword">concentration</span>
	of the substance in the
	<span class="dilnsolntypewords">working&nbsp;(diluted)</span>
	solution and select&nbsp;the&nbsp;units:</th>
 <td><input type="text" class="inputvalue" size="6" maxlength="6"
    name="diluteConcentrationValue" /></td>
 <td id="diluteDim"></td></tr>
<tr><th>Enter the <span class="dilnconcword">volume</span>
	of the <span class="dilnsolntypewords">working&nbsp;(diluted)</span>
	solution and select&nbsp;the&nbsp;units:</th>
<td><input type="text" class="inputvalue" size="6" name="volumeValue" /></td>
<td id="volumeDim"></td></tr>
<tr id="FWrow" style="visibility:hidden;">
 <th style="text-align:right;vertical-align:middle;">
 <div style="font-size:150%;float:right;margin:0.5em 0 0.5em 1em;">FW&nbsp;=</div>
   The formula (molecular) weight of the substance is required for
   this calculation:</th>
 <td colspan="2" align="left" style="vertical-align:middle">
  <input type="text" style="margin-right:0.5em;" class="inputvalue"
   size="6" name="FW" />g/mol</td></tr>

<!-- row of table for user to practice -->

<tr id="practicerow" style="visibility:hidden;">
 <th style="text-align:right;">
  Enter the answer that you calculated<br />
  for the volume of the stock solution to use:</th>
 <td align="right"><input type="text" size="4" name="practiceValue"
   style="font-size:120%;background-color:#f0f0ff;text-align:right;" /></td>
<td id="practiceDim"></td></tr>
</table>
</form>
</div>
<!-- ============================
       Write Dilutions Help
     ============================ -->
<div id="write-dilutions-help" style="display:none;">
<p style="font:bold 110% 'Times New Roman','Times Roman',Times,serif;
      color:blue;margin-top:8em;"><a name="help">How To Use</a></p>
<div style="font-size:90%;">
This calculator determines the volume of a more concentrated stock solution
that will be used in preparing a dilute working solution whose desired
concentration and volume is known.
<p>
This type of calculation is virtually the most commonly done among biological
scientists/researchers, and this calculator makes it easy.  Calculations of
this type apply the law that describes the conservation of mass: the product of
solution density (or concentration) and the volume of a solution is equal to
the mass of the substance in solution, and since dilution of a more
concentrated solution does not change the mass of the solute in solution, then
the products of concentration and volume of the solution before and after
dilution are equal.</p>
<p>
Expressing that as an equation:</p>
<p style="text-align:center;">
  <i>C</i><sub>1</sub><i>V</i><sub>1</sub> = <i>C</i><sub>2</sub><i>V</i><sub>2</sub></p>
<p>
<b>Example #1</b>: As an example of using this form, suppose
one wants to make a 500 ml solution of 0.2 M sodium acetate solution
and there is a 3 M sodium acetate stock solution available.
Enter "3" in the input box for the stock solution (first box)
and select "mol/L" in the dropdown selection list,
enter "0.2" in box below for dilute working solution and select
its units, and then enter "500" in the box for the volume and select
"mL" for the volume dimensions.  To get the answer, click the button
"How is it done?"</p>
<p>
<b>Example #2</b>: Suppose one has a 70% concentrated perchloric acid stock
solution and one wants to make 1 liter of a 0.5 M stock solution. (Do not be
confused here: "stock" essentially means a solution one will keep stored for
regular use. One more dilute stock solution is being prepared from a more
concentrated stock, so this calculator is still useful.). Enter "70" top box,
"0.5" in the one below, and "1" in the box for the volume. Notice that as the
units are selected, that a new entry suddenly appears, asking for a "formula
weight" (or molecular weight). Read the formula weight for perchloric acid from
the label, and enter it. Note that whenever the concentration units for one
solution is &lsquo;a form of grams per unit volume&rsquo; and the other is
&lsquo;a form of moles per unit volume,&rsquo; a formula weight for the
substance is required to make the proper conversion.</p>
<p>
This calculator also provides a service of letting you calculate the answer
yourself and checking it against the computed result. Check the box to activate
the part of the form that allows you to enter an answer.</p>
</div>
  <a href="#document-title">Back to the calculator</a>
</div>
</body>
</html>