<?xml version="1.0"?>
<root>
<!-- ===========================================================
                 PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS
     ===========================================================  -->
<div id="pca-info" style="margin-top:2em;width:30em;">
Principal Component  Analysis (PCA)

<h1>Prerequisite Knowledge</h1>
A knowledge of parametric statistics will be assumed, such as the
fundamental calculation of mean, variance, and standard deviation
of normally distributed data.  Tests for normality exist to indicate
if data is skewed or not.

<h2>Covariance and Covariance Matrix</h2>
Whereas the variance of a one-dimensional dataset is the sum of
square of differences between data about its mean, the
covariance is the sum of the product of the difference between
two datasets and their mean:

<div class="eqnserif" style="margin-top:1em;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;">
<i>var</i>(<i>x</i>) = { &sum; (<i>x<sub>i</sub></i> &minus;
 <i style="text-decoration:overline;">x</i>)(<i>x<sub>i</sub></i> &minus;
 <i style="text-decoration:overline;">x</i>) } / (<i>n</i> &minus; 1)
<p>
<i>cov</i>(<i>x, y</i>) = { &sum; (<i>x<sub>i</sub></i> &minus;
 <i style="text-decoration:overline;">x</i>)(<i>y<sub>i</sub></i> &minus;
 <i style="text-decoration:overline;">y</i>) } / (<i>n</i> &minus; 1)
</div>
for all <i>i</i> from 1 to <i>n</i>.  Note that if the computed
value is &lt;0, the increase in one dataset involves a decrease
in values of the second dataset.  If the covariance is 0, then
the data are independent of one another.
<p>
In a multidimensional dataset, a pairing of each dimension can
help in the computation of a covariance.  For 3 dimensions,
3 covariance values can be computed.  In fact for <i>n</i>
dimensions, it is possible to compute
<i>n</i>!&nbsp;/&nbsp;(2(<i>n</i>&minus;2)!) covariance values.
For all values of all dimensions, a covariance matrix can be
constructed with <i>n</i> &times; <i>n</i> dimensions:
<p style="text-align:center;" class="eqnserif">
<i>C<sup>n&times;n</sup></i> = (<i>c<sub>i,j</sub></i>,
<i>c<sub>i,j</sub></i> = <i>cov</i>(<i>Dim<sub>i</sub></i>,
<i>Dim<sub>j</sub></i>).
<p>A three-dimensional <i>x, y, z</i>
covariance matrix would look:
<div style="text-align:center;">
<table class="matrixtabl">
<tr><td rowspan="3"><i>C</i> = <span style="font-size:250%;">(</span>
 <td><i>cov</i>(<i>x,x</i>)
 <td><i>cov</i>(<i>x,y</i>)
 <td><i>cov</i>(<i>x,z</i>)
<td rowspan="3" style="font-size:250%;">)
<tr><td><i>cov</i>(<i>y,x</i>)
 <td><i>cov</i>(<i>y,y</i>)
 <td><i>cov</i>(<i>y,z</i>)
<tr><td><i>cov</i>(<i>z,x</i>)
 <td><i>cov</i>(<i>z,y</i>)
 <td><i>cov</i>(<i>z,z</i>)
</table>
</div>
Note that in the matrix, the diagonal is just the variance of
one dimension of the dataset.  Also the matrix is symmetrical,
since <i>cov</i>(<i>a,b</i>) = <i>cov</i>(<i>b,a</i>)

<h1>Matrix Algebra</h1>
Two matrices can be multiplied together if they meet certain
requirements.  Suppose a vector is multiplied to a square matrix,
which is a <i>transformation matrix</i>.  The result is another
vector that is transformed from its original position.
An <i>eigenvector</i> is a vector that is a multiple of
a vector affected by a transformation matrix.  Eigenvectors
are properties of only certain square matrices:  for such
<i>n</i> &times; <i>n</i> matrices, there are <i>n</i> eigenvectors.
Eigenvectors as such scale the magnitude of vectors they transform,
without altering their direction.  An additional property is
that all eigenvectors are <i>orthogonal</i> (perpendicular) to
the plane of the square matrix.  Additionally eigenvectors
are scaled to 1 so that they all have the same length.
<div style="text-align:center;"><table class="matrixtabl">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><span style="font-size:175%;">(</span>
 <td>3
<td rowspan="2" style="font-size:175%;">)
<tr><td>2
</table></div>
is an eigenvector with a length of &radic;(3<sup>2</sup> +
2<sup>2</sup>) = &radic;13.  Thus if the vector is divided
by that amount, a vector whose length is one is produced
<div style="text-align:center;"><table class="matrixtabl">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><span style="font-size:175%;">(</span>
 <td>3/&radic;13
<td rowspan="2" style="font-size:175%;">)
<tr><td>2/&radic;13
</table></div>
The <b>eigenvalue</b> is the scaling factor of the matrix
to produce the eigenvector.
<div style="text-align:center;"><table class="matrixtabl">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><span style="font-size:175%;">(</span>
 <td>2 <td>3
 <td rowspan="2"><span style="font-size:175%;">)</span>
    &times; <span style="font-size:175%;">(</span>
 <td>3
 <td rowspan="2"><span style="font-size:175%;">)</span>
     = <span style="font-size:175%;">(</span>
 <td>12
 <td rowspan="2"><span style="font-size:175%;">)</span>
  = 4 &times; <span style="font-size:175%;">(</span>
 <td>3
 <td rowspan="2"><span style="font-size:175%;">)</span>
<tr><td>2 <td>1  <td>2  <td>8  <td>2
</table></div>
Thus for the matrix, an eigenvector and its eigenvalue
are determined.


<h1>PCA Defined</h1>
[Taken from one single page explanation by NGA Data Mining.]
<ul>
<li>Reduces dimensionality of large data sets,
 particularly useful in microarray analysis
<li>Finds signals in noisy data
</ul>
Suppose <i>X</i> is a matrix of data <i>n</i> rows (observations)
&times; <i>p</i> columns (variables), <i>x</i><sub>1</sub>,
<i>x</i><sub>2</sub>, ...,<i>x<sub>p</sub></i>.  There is
another matrix <i>S</i> which is a <i>p</i> &times; <i>p</i>
covariance matrix with the same set of <i>x<sub>i</sub></i> variables.
<p>
A vector <i>a</i><sub>1</sub> of length <i>p</i> is found such that
<i>a</i><sub>1</sub><sup><i>T</i></sup><i>Sa</i><sub>1</sub>
is maximized subject to
<i>a</i><sub>1</sub><sup><i>T</i></sup><i>a</i><sub>1</sub> = 1.
<p>
A variable <i>z</i><sub>1</sub> = &sum;<sup><i>p</i></sup><sub
style="margin-left:-0.5em;vertical-align:-0.5em;"><i>i</i>=1</sub>
<i>a</i><sub>1<i>i</i></sub><i> x<sub>i</sub></i>
represents the first principal component, and provides a linear
combination of variables yielding maximum variation.
A second principal component, <i>z</i><sub>2</sub> =
&sum;<sup><i>p</i></sup><sub
style="margin-left:-0.5em;vertical-align:-0.5em;"><i>i</i>=1</sub>
<i>a</i><sub>2<i>i</i></sub><i> x<sub>i</sub></i>
is found with the condition that
<i>a</i><sub>2</sub><sup><i>T</i></sup><i>Sa</i><sub>2</sub>
is maximized subject to
<i>a</i><sub>2</sub><sup><i>T</i></sup><i>a</i><sub>2</sub> = 0.
<p>
A linear combination of variables will now be orthogonal to the first
principal component to provide maximum variation.  Additional
principal components are derived in a similar way.
<p>
Vectors <i>a</i><sub>1</sub>, <i>a</i><sub>2</sub>, ...,
<i>a<sub>p</sub></i> are eigenvectors of matrix <i>S</i>.  Associated
with each is an eigenvalue &lambda;<sub><i>i</i></sub><sup>2</sup>.
The value &lambda;<sub><i>i</i></sub><sup>2</sup> /
&sum; &lambda;<sub><i>i</i></sub><sup>2</sup> is the proportion of
variation explained by the <i>i</i>th principal component.
Alternative, the <i>a<sub>i</sub></i> values can be considered to be
right singular vectors in a singular value decomposition with
singular values &lambda;<sub><i>i</i></sub> of the matrix centered
about its mean and scaled by 1&nbsp;/&nbsp;&radic;<span
style="text-decoration:overline;">(<i>n</i>&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;1)</span>,
<i>X<sub>s</sub></i>.
<p>
If <i>X<sub>s</sub></i> = <i>V</i> &Lambda; <i>P&acute;</i>,
with &Lambda; being a diagonal matrix with elements &lambda;<sub><i>i</i></sub>,
<i>P&acute;</i> is a <i>p</i> &times; <i>p</i> matrix with columns
<i>a<sub>i</sub></i>, and <i>V</i> is an <i>n</i> &times; <i>p</i>
matrix with <i>V&acute;V = I</i>, this produces the principal component
scores.
<p>
In reducing the dimensions of data sets, one replaces a large number
of correlated variables with smaller number of orthogonal variables
containing most of the information of the data set.  The choice of
the count of dimensions is based on the variation of the leading
principal components.  If <i>k</i> principal components are selected,
the test of equality for the remaining <i>p&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;k</i> eigenvalues
is:
<p class="eqnserif" style="width:30em;text-align:center;">
(<i>n</i> &minus; 1 &minus; (2<i>p</i> + 5) / 6 { &minus;
&sum;<sup style="margin-left:-0.5em;vertical-align:1.5em;"><i>p</i></sup>
<sub style="margin-left:-2em;vertical-align:-1.25em;"><i>i=k</i>+1</sub>
log(&lambda;<sub><i>i</i></sub><sup>2</sup>) + (<i>p &minus; k</i>)
log ( &sum;<sup style="margin-left:-0.5em;vertical-align:1.5em;"><i>p</i></sup>
<sub style="margin-left:-2em;vertical-align:-1.25em;"><i>i=k</i>+1</sub>
&lambda;<sub><i>i</i></sub><sup>2</sup>/(<i>p&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;k</i>) }
<p>
This has asymptotically a &chi;<sup>2</sup> distribution with
1/2(<i>p&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;k</i>&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;1)(<i>p&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;k</i>&nbsp;+&nbsp;2)
degrees of freedom.  Equality in the remaining eigenvalues indicates
that if more principal components are to be considered, they should
all be considered.
<p>
Instead of the variance-covariance matrix, the correlation matrix,
sum of squares and cross-products matrix, or a standardized sum of
squares and cross-products matrix can be used.  In the latter case
&sigma;<sup>&minus;1/2</sup><i>S</i>&sigma;<sup>&minus;1/2</sup>
is used instead of <i>S</i> for a diagonal matrix &sigma; with positive
elements.  If correlation matrix is used, the &chi;<sup>2</sup>
approximation for the statistic given above is not valid.
<p>
Principal component scores <i>F</i> are the values of the principal
component variables for the observations.  They can be adjusted
(standardized) so that the variance of the scores for each component
is 1.0 or equal to the corresponding eigenvalue.
<p>
In weighting components, the matrix <i>X</i> is first centered about the
weighted means, then each row is scaled by an amount &radic;<i>w<sub>i</sub></i>
where <i>w<sub>i</sub></i> is the weight of the <i>i</i>th observation.


</div>
</root>