<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<!-- ================================================
                    pH TABLE
     ================================================ -->

<head>
<title>pH and pKa Calculations</title>
</head>

<body>
<div id="pHpKa-page">
<p style="clear:both;" />
<hr style="margin-bottom:0;" />
<p class="subtitle" style="margin-top:0;background-color:#eee;">
pH and p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub>: Henderson-Hasselbach</p>

<div style="margin-top:0;">
<div style="float:right;background-color:#f0f0ff;border:2px solid blue;padding:0 0.5em;
color:blue;font:bold 200% 'Times New Roman','Times Roman',Times,serif;"
      onclick="show_pH_help();">?
</div>
</div>

<form id="pHpKaform" action="#">
<table id="pH_form">
<col />
<col />
<col style="padding-left:0.5em;padding-right:0.5em;" />
<!-- input rows  -->
<tr style="background-color:#fff0f0;">
 <td class="headings">pH: </td>
 <td rowspan="3" style="background-color:#ffd;text-align:center;"><button type="button"
 	style="width:60px;height:60px;background-color:#d8d8d8;"
	 onclick="centcalc();">Press To Update</button>
  <div style="text-align:left;font-size:75%;margin-top:1em;">
   <input type="radio" name="updatefactor" value="ph" />pH<br />
   <input type="radio" name="updatefactor" value="pka" />p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub><br />
   <input type="radio" name="updatefactor" value="conc" />total concentration<br />
  </div> </td>
 <td><div class="errorborder"><input type="text" name="pH" size="6"
 maxlength="6" value="" class="numvalue" onchange="calcHenderson(this);" /></div></td></tr>
<tr style="background-color:#f0fff0;">
 <td class="headings">p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub>: </td>
 <td><div class="errorborder"><input type="text" name="pKa" size="6"
 maxlength="6" class="numvalue" onchange="calcHenderson(this);" /></div> </td></tr>
<tr style="background-color:#f0f0ff;">
 <td class="headings">Total Concentration: </td>
 <td><div class="errorborder"><input type="text" name="totconc" size="6"
 maxlength="6" class="numvalue" onchange="calcHenderson(this);" /></div> </td> </tr>
<tr> <td> </td> <td>
   <input type="reset" name="clear" value="Clear All" onclick="clearpHpKa();" />
  </td></tr>
</table>
</form>
</div>

<div id="pHpKa-help" style="display:none;">
<div style="width:30em;float:left;margin-right:3em;
  padding:1em 2em;background-color:#f8fff8;border:1px solid green;">
<h1>Theory</h1>
Weak acids such as acetic acid (CH<sub>3</sub>COOH) or phosphoric acid
(H<sub>3</sub>PO<sub>4</sub>) can be placed in water and reach an equilibrium
in aqueous solution in which protons are transferred in the reaction:
<p class="eqnserif">
HA<sup><i>n</i></sup> + H<sub>2</sub>O
  <span style="vertical-align:0.5em;">&rarr;</span><span
   style="margin-left:-1em;">&larr;</span> A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup> +
  H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup> </p>
<p>
<b>HA</b> represents the protonated (acid) form of <b>A</b>, which is
the conjugate base.  <b>A</b> has an ionic charge of <i>n</i> while bound
to its proton (<i>n</i> could be zero). </p>
<p>
The equilibrium constant for this acid-base reaction, also called
the acid dissociation constant, is defined as the ratio of the multiplied
concentrations of the product and the multiplied concentration of the
reactants, as for all equilibrium constants: </p>

<table class="eqnserif">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><i>K</i><sub>a</sub> = </td>
    <td class="numer">[A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup>] &times;
		[H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup>] </td> </tr>
<tr><td>[HA<sup><i>n</i></sup>] &times; [H<sub>2</sub>O] </td></tr>
</table>
<p>
By long-standing convention, water is removed from the equilibrium
equation because its concentration effectively does not change in dilute
acid solutions. </p>

<p class="eqnserif">
HA<sup><i>n</i></sup> <span style="vertical-align:0.5em;">&rarr;</span><span
   style="margin-left:-1em;">&larr;</span> A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup> +
  H<sup>+</sup> </p>
<p>
And the acid dissociation constant is thus defined: </p>

<table class="eqnserif" style="margin:auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><i>K</i><sub>a</sub> = </td>
    <td class="numer">[A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup>] &times;
		[H<sup>+</sup>] </td></tr>
<tr><td>[HA<sup><i>n</i></sup>]  </td></tr>
</table>
<p>
The following equation takes the logarithm of both sides of the equation
above and does some algebraic rearrangement:  </p>

<table class="eqnserif"  style="margin:auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2">&minus;log [H<sup>+</sup>] = &minus; log<i>K</i><sub>a</sub> + log</td>
  <td class="numer">[A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup>] </td></tr>
<tr><td>[HA<sup><i>n</i></sup>] </td></tr>
</table>
<p>
Note that a principle of logarithms is that
log&nbsp;(<i>ab</i>&nbsp;/&nbsp;<i>c</i>) = log&nbsp;<i>a</i> + log&nbsp;<i>b</i> &minus;
log&nbsp;<i>c</i>.  </p>
<p>
By definition, <b>pH</b> = &minus; log [H<sup>+</sup>], and
<b>p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub></b> = &minus; log <i>K</i><sub>a</sub>, and so
the following substitutions are made: </p>

<table class="eqnserif" style="margin:auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2">pH = p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub> + log </td>
  <td class="numer">[A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup>] </td></tr>
<tr><td>[HA<sup><i>n</i></sup>] </td></tr>
</table>
<p>
This equation is called the Henderson-Hasselbach equation, after the
scientists who presented what is really another form of the acid
dissociation constant.  It essentially states that given the physical
property of a weak acid, its acid dissociation constant the <i>K</i><sub>a</sub>,
and knowing the ratio of its conjugate base A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup>
to its protonated form HA<sup><i>n</i></sup>, one can calculate the pH.
Actually one can calculate any parameter of the equation if one knows
any of the other parameters. </p>
<p>
In many cases the ratio of the conjugate base A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup>
and protonated form HA<sup><i>n</i></sup> is not set (and thus not known).
For example, if only the acid form or conjugate base (salt of the acid)
is placed in solution, then the dissociation must be determined from the
total concentration.  Assume the total concentration of all forms of
the conjugate base <b>A</b> is <i>C</i> (a number representing the solution
density, such as 1 M [one molar]).  Thus: </p>
<p class="eqnserif">
 <i>C</i> = A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup> + HA<sup><i>n</i></sup>  </p>
<p>
Now if the acid had been added, the concentration of
A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup> and H<sup>+</sup> are the same, since
acid dissociation means that these ions must be formed equally.
And with the dissociation, the concentration of HA<sup><i>n</i></sup>
should be the total <i>C</i> less the concentration of
A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup> (or H<sup>+</sup>) that is formed.
Assume that <i>x</i> = [A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup>] which also equals
[H<sup>+</sup>], and so [HA<sup><i>n</i></sup>] = <i>C</i> &minus; <i>x</i>.
The equilibrium equation should now look like this: </p>

<table class="eqnserif" style="margin:auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><i>K</i><sub>a</sub> = </td>
  <td class="numer"><i>x</i><sup>2</sup> </td></tr>
<tr><td><i>C</i> &minus; <i>x</i> </td></tr>
</table>
<p>
<i>C</i> and <i>K</i><sub>a</sub> are known, and so the solution of
<i>x</i> is obtained (use the quadratic equation to solve for the positive
root of <i>x</i>).  As <i>x</i> represents [H<sup>+</sup>], the resulting
pH of the solution is easily calculated. </p>
<p>
Suppose on the other hand, the salt of the acid (conjugate base) is added
to water and allowed to reach equilibrium.  What is the final pH? </p>
<p>
First look at the reaction occurring at equilibrium: </p>
<p class="eqnserif">
A<sup><i>n</i></sup> + H<sub>2</sub>O
  <span style="vertical-align:0.5em;">&rarr;</span><span
   style="margin-left:-1em;">&larr;</span> HA<sup><i>n</i>+1</sup> +
  OH<sup>&minus;</sup> </p>
<p>
The equilibrium constant, <i>K</i><sub>b</sub>, is: </p>

<table class="eqnserif" style="margin:auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><i>K</i><sub>b</sub> = </td>
    <td class="numer">[HA<sup><i>n</i>+1</sup>] &times; [OH<sup>&minus;</sup>] </td></tr>
<tr><td>[A<sup><i>n</i></sup>]  </td></tr>
</table>
<p>
<i>K</i><sub>b</sub> happens to be 10<sup>&minus;14</sup> /
<i>K</i><sub>a</sub> for the acid form of the conjugate base.
As proof of this: </p>
<p>
It is well-known that the acid dissociation of water itself </p>
<p class="eqnserif">
H<sub>2</sub>O <span style="vertical-align:0.5em;">&rarr;</span><span
   style="margin-left:-1em;">&larr;</span> H<sup>+</sup> +
  OH<sup>&minus;</sup> </p>
<p>
although the reaction is actually: </p>
<p class="eqnserif">
2  H<sub>2</sub>O <span style="vertical-align:0.5em;">&rarr;</span><span
   style="margin-left:-1em;">&larr;</span> H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup> +
  OH<sup>&minus;</sup> </p>
<p>
The acid dissociation constant, <i>K</i><sub>w</sub>, is defined and its
value is well known: </p>
<p class="eqnserif">
<i>K</i><sub>w</sub> = [H<sup>+</sup>] [OH<sup>&minus;</sup>] = 10<sup>&minus;14</sup> </p>
<p>
Since [OH<sup>&minus;</sup>] = 10<sup>&minus;14</sup> / [H<sup>+</sup>], the
appropriate substitution is made for the <i>K</i><sub>b</sub> equation: </p>

<table class="eqnserif" style="margin:auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><i>K</i><sub>b</sub> = </td>
    <td class="numer">[HA<sup><i>n</i>+1</sup>] &times; 10<sup>&minus;14</sup> </td></tr>
<tr><td>[A<sup><i>n</i></sup>] &times; [H<sup>+</sup>] </td></tr>
</table>
<p>
Since 1 / <i>K</i><sub>a</sub> = [HA<sup><i>n</i>+1</sup>] /
([A<sup><i>n</i></sup>] + [H<sup>+</sup>]), then: </p>

<table class="eqnserif" style="margin:auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><i>K</i><sub>b</sub> = </td>
    <td class="numer">10<sup>&minus;14</sup> </td></tr>
<tr><td><i>K</i><sub>a</sub> </td></tr>
</table>
Now the formation of [HA<sup><i>n</i>+1</sup>] and [OH<sup>&minus;</sup>]
in the reaction is equal, and the total concentration of all forms
of the acid is <i>C</i> = [HA<sup><i>n</i>+1</sup>] + [A<sup><i>n</i></sup>].
Substituting correctly, the equation is

<table class="eqnserif" style="margin:auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><i>K</i><sub>b</sub> = </td>
    <td class="numer"><i>x</i><sup>2</sup> </td></tr>
<tr><td><i>C</i> &minus; <i>x</i> </td></tr>
</table>
<p>
In solving for <i>x</i>, one gets [OH<sup>&minus;</sup>].  To find the
pH, one can calculate the pOH (= &minus;log [OH<sup>&minus;</sup>])
and then subtract its value from 14, or one can divide 10<sup>&minus;14</sup>
by the value of [OH<sup>&minus;</sup>] and then take the negative of the
logarithm of the result. </p>
<p>
These calculations work well for monoprotic acids and for polyprotic
acids whose acid dissociations constants are separated by 3 or 4 orders
of magnitude, but can become more complex with polyprotic acids whose
acid dissociation constants are within 1-2 orders of magnitude within
one another. </p>

<p>
For examples, see the <b>How To Use</b> section. </p>
</div>


<div id="pHpKa-how-to-use" style="width:35em;background-color:#f8f8ff;
 border:1px solid blue;padding:1em 2em;">
<h1>How To Use</h1>
The use of this interface is shown by a few examples.
<p>
1. A solution of 0.1 M (glacial) acetic acid is prepared.  What is the
final pH? </p>
<div class="answer">
One needs to know the acid dissociation constant and the total concentration.
This problem is solved using the <i>K</i><sub>a</sub> = <i>x</i><sup>2</sup>
/ (<i>C &minus; x</i>) form, and using the quadratic equation to solve
for <i>x</i>.
<p>
Either enter the <b>p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub></b> or the <b><i>K</i><sub>a</sub></b>
for acetic acid into the box (or alternatively, select from the list
of well known acids or bases, and it will be entered automatically). </p>
<p>
Enter the <b>Total Concentration</b> and make sure to select the proper
units. </p>
<p>
Select the pH to be calculated, and the pH and the concentrations of
all the components will be reported. </p>
<p>
If the p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub> = 4.76, and <i>C</i> = 0.1, then the
quadratic equation is used: </p>

<table class="eqnserif" style="font-size:90%;margin:auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2"><i>x</i> =  </td>
    <td class="numer">&minus;<i>K</i><sub>a</sub> &plusmn;
		&radic;<span class="overbar"><i>K</i><sub>a</sub><sup>2</sup> &minus;
		4(&minus;<i>K</i><sub>a</sub> &times; <i>C</i>)</span>  </td>
 <td rowspan="2"> = </td>
    <td class="numer">&minus;(10<sup>&minus;4.76</sup>) &plusmn;
		&radic;<span class="overbar">(10<sup>&minus;4.76</sup>)<sup>2</sup>
		&minus; 4(&minus;10<sup>&minus;4.76</sup> &times; 0.1)</span> </td></tr>
<tr><td>2 </td><td> 2 </td></tr>
</table>
The solutions for <i>x</i> are &minus;0.001327 and 0.0013096, but only the
positive solution is relevant.  Thus [H<sup>+</sup>] = 0.00131 M, and the
pH = &minus;log[0.00131] = 2.88.  The concentration of acetate
ion [CH<sub>3</sub>COO<sup>&minus;</sup>] should be equal to the
[H<sup>+</sup>] concentration, and the concentration of undissociated
acid [CH<sub>3</sub>COOH] will be 0.1 &minus; 0.00131 or 0.09869.
Note that the calculation of the pH
is independent of knowing the volume of the solution.
</div>
<p>
2. 10 grams of monobasic sodium phosphate dihydrate
(NaH<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub> &bull; 2 H<sub>2</sub>O)
is mixed with 25 grams of dibasic potassium phosphate
(K<sub>2</sub>HPO<sub>4</sub>) in a final 500 ml solution.
What is the final pH? </p>
<div class="answer">
The acid is a form of phosphoric acid.  Phosphoric acid is a polyprotic
acid with three acidic protons with p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub> values of
2.3, 7.2, and 12.2.  When NaH<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub> &bull; 2 H<sub>2</sub>O
is dissolved in solution, it produces the ion H<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub><sup>&minus;</sup>.
When K<sub>2</sub>HPO<sub>4</sub> is dissolved in solution, it produces
the ion HPO<sub>4</sub><sup>2&minus;</sup>.  These two ions are in
equilibrium:
<p class="eqnserif">
H<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub> <span style="vertical-align:0.5em;">&rarr;</span><span
   style="margin-left:-1em;">&larr;</span> H<sup>+</sup> +
  HPO<sub>4</sub><sup>2&minus;</sup> </p>
<p>
Because this is the second proton released from phosphate, the second
p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub> is relevant to this reaction (p<i>K</i><sub>a</sub> = 7.2). The
formula weight of NaH<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub> &bull; 2 H<sub>2</sub>O is 156.
01 g/mol. The concentration is thus calculated to be (10 g) / (156.01 g/mol
&times; 0.5 L) = 0.1282 M. Note that this is the concentration of all the ions
in solution: [Na<sup>+</sup>] and [H<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub><sup>&minus;</sup>
]. The formula weight of K<sub>2</sub>HPO<sub>4</sub> is 174.18 g/mol. The
concentration of this molecule in solution is (25 g) / (174.18 g/mol &times; 0.
5 L) = 0.2871 M. Because there are 2 moles of potassium per mole molecule, its
concentration is 0.574 M. However neither the [Na<sup>+</sup>] or [K<sup>+</sup>]
contribute to the pH calculations, although it does contribute to the ionic strength. </p>
<p>
The Henderson-Hasselbach form of the equation can now be used to calculate
the pH.	Note that [A<sup><i>n</i>&minus;1</sup>] = 0.2871 M (where <i>n</i> =
&minus;1 although that is not significant) and [HA<sup><i>n</i></sup>] =
0.1282 M.  Thus pH = 7.2 + log (0.2871)/(0.1282) = 7.55, the final value. </p>
<p>
The interface tries to give the user as many options as possible without
doing pre-calculations, but some pre-calculations may be necessary. </p>
</div>
3. A 50 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.5 solution is to be prepared using Tris base
salt and concentrated hydrochloric acid.  The final volume is 1 liter.
How much Tris base and HCl should be weighed out?
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>