<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<!-- ============================
          SDS-PAGE assistance
	============================ -->
<head>
<title>Calculations for Laemmli SDS-PAGE Gels</title>
<style type="text/css">
	#sds-page * input {text-align:right;color:navy;font:bold 110% Arial,Helvetica,sans-serif;}
	#sds-page * select {color:navy;font:bold 110% Arial,Helvetica,sans-serif;}
	#sds-table {padding:5px; background-color:#ccc;}
	#sds-table th {padding:0.3em 0.5em; background-color:#fff0f0;
			vertical-align:bottom;font:bold 90% Tahoma,Verdana,Arial,sans-serif;
			border-top:2px solid #aaa;border-left:2px solid #aaa;
			border-right:2px solid #fffdfd;border-bottom:2px solid #fffdfd;}
	#sds-table td {padding:0.3em 0.5em; background-color:#f0fff0;
			font:normal 100% Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif;
			border-top:2px solid #aaa;border-left:2px solid #aaa;
			border-right:2px solid #fdfffd;border-bottom:2px solid #fdfffd;}
	#SDS-error-info {font:normal 83% Tahoma,Verdana,Arial,sans-serif ! important;
	color:red;}
	#SDS-error-info ul {margin:0;padding:0;}
	#SDS-error-info * li {margin-left:0;padding-left:0;}

#SDS-MW-Calculator {background-color:#999;}
#SDS-MW-Calculator td {text-align:right;font:bold 120% Arial,Helvetica,sans-serif;}
</style>
</head>

<body>
<div id="sds-page" style="display:none;">

<p style="color:olive;font:bold 125% Verdana,Tahoma,sans-serif;">
SDS-PAGE Calculations</p>
<form id="sds-page-form" action="#">
<p>
Fill in the table so that the calculations can be made.  The concentrations
for stock reagents are typical, but change them to suit your purposes.
<span id="sds-detailed-help" style="color:purple;">Click anywhere on
	this sentence to display detailed instructions.
</span>
</p>

<div style="float:left;margin-right:2em;">
<table id="sds-table">
<col style="width:7em;" />
<col style="width:7em;" />
<col span="2" style="width:13em;text-align:center;" />
<tr>
   <th colspan="3"
      style="font:normal 83% Arial,Helvetica,sans-serif;background-color:#e8d0ff;">
   <input type="checkbox" name="volerrorcalc" checked="checked" />
 	 In volume calculations, add <input type="text" size="2" maxlength="2"
	     name="volerrorval" value="15" />% for pipetting error
	  <button type="button" id="SDS-Table-Print-Button"
	     style="display:none;font:normal 90% 'Arial Narrow',Arial,sans-serif;color:green;">Make
	   	a printable version of this table
		</button>
	</th>

	<th colspan="2" class="gelheader">Resolving / Separating / Running Gel </th>
  <th colspan="2" class="gelheader">Stacking Gel </th></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3">Final percentage </td>
   <td colspan="2" style="text-align:center;">
       <input name="sepgelconc" type="text" size="3" maxlength="5" />% </td>
   <td colspan="2" style="text-align:center;">
      <input name="stackgelconc" type="text" size="3" maxlength="5" value="4" />% </td></tr>
<!-- final volume row -->
<tr><td id="finalvolhdr">Final volume </td>
   <td colspan="2" id="finalvolradios"
			style="font:normal 90% 'Arial Narrow',Arial,sans-serif;width:16em;">
	  <input id="gelvol-given-option-input" type="radio" name="gelvolumes" value="volumegiven"
				checked="checked" /> Volume is specified <br />
	 	<input id="gelvol-given-calcd-input" type="radio" name="gelvolumes" value="volumecalcd" />
			Calculate volume from gel dimensions
	</td>
	 <td colspan="2" id="sepgelvoltd" style="text-align:center;" class="calcdinputs">
			<input name="sepfgelvol" type="text" size="3" maxlength="5" /> ml </td>
	 <td colspan="2" id="stackgelvoltd" style="text-align:center;" class="calcdinputs">
			<input name="stackgelvol" type="text" size="3" maxlength="5" /> ml </td>
	 <td colspan="2" id="gelcounttd" style="display:none;" class="calcdinputs">
			Count of gels: <input name="gelcount" value="1" type="text" size="2"
					maxlength="2" /> </td></tr>
<!-- gel height row -->
	<tr id="gelheighttr" style="display:none;">
	 <td colspan="2" class="calcdinputs">
		<div style="margin:0 0.5em 0 0;padding:0;float:left;width:4em;">resolving height:</div>
		<input name="sepgelheight" type="text" size="4" maxlength="4" />
	  <select name="sepgelheightdim"><option>cm</option><option>mm</option></select> </td>
	 <td  colspan="2" class="calcdinputs">
		<div style="margin:0 0.5em 0 0;padding:0;float:left;width:4em;">stacking height:</div>
		<input name="stackgelheight" type="text" size="4" maxlength="4" />
	  <select name="stackgelheightdim"><option>cm</option><option>mm</option></select>
      </td></tr>
<!-- gel width & depth row -->
	<tr id="gelwidthdepthtr" style="display:none;">
		<td colspan="3" class="calcdinputs">
		gel width: <input name="gelwidth" type="text" size="4" maxlength="4" />
	  <select name="gelwidthdim"><option>cm</option><option>mm</option></select>
	<br />gel depth: <input name="geldepth" type="text" size="4" maxlength="4" /> mm
      </td></tr>
<!-- calculated volume row -->
	<tr id="calcdgeltr" style="display:none;">
		<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="calcdsepgelvol">&nbsp;</span> ml </td>
		<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="calcdstackgelvol">&nbsp;</span> ml
      </td></tr>

<tr><td colspan="5" style="background-color:#ccc;" id="SDS-error-info">&nbsp;</td></tr>
<tr><th colspan="3" style="background:none;"> </th>
  <th class="subheader">Final Concentration </th>
  <th class="subheader">Volume to Pipet </th>
  <th class="subheader">Final Concentration </th>
  <th>Volume to Pipet </th></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3"><input name="sepgelbuff" type="text" size="3" maxlength="3"
		value="1.5" /> M Tris HCl, pH 8.8 </td>
  <td><input name="finalsepbuff" size="5" maxlength="5" value="0.375" /> M </td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="sepgelbuffvol">&nbsp;</span> </td>
	<td colspan="2" style="background:none;">  </td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3"><input name="stackgelbuff" type="text" size="3" maxlength="5"
		value="0.5" /> M Tris HCl, pH 6.8 </td>
	<td colspan="2" style="background:none;"> </td>
  <td><input name="finalstackbuff" size="5" maxlength="5" value="0.125" /> M </td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="stackgelbuffvol">&nbsp;</span> </td></tr>
<tr><td  colspan="3" style="line-height:2em;">acrylamide/crosslinker*
 <p style="text-align:right;margin:0;">
	<select name="acrylamide" size="4" style="vertical-align:top;">
	<option value="30">30% T / 2.6% C (37.5:1)</option>
	<option value="30">30% T / 2.7% C (29.2:0.8)</option>
	<option value="40">40% T / 2.6% C (37.5:1)</option>
	<option value="38.5">38.5% T / 2.6% C (37.5:1)</option>
	<option value="30">30% T / 3.3% C (29:1)</option>
	<option value="20">&dagger; 20% T / 5% C (19:1)</option>
	</select> </p></td>
	<td colspan="2" style="text-align:center;">
    <span id="sepgelAcrylVol">&nbsp;</span> </td>
	<td colspan="2" style="text-align:center;">
    <span id="stackgelAcrylVol">&nbsp;</span> </td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3"><input name="SDSconc" type="text" size="3" maxlength="5"
		value="10" />% SDS </td>
  <td><input name="SDSfinalsepconc" size="4" value="0.1" />% </td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="sepgelSDSvol">&nbsp;</span> </td>
  <td><input name="SDSfinalstackconc" size="4" value="0.1" />% </td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="stackgelSDSvol">&nbsp;</span></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3">ultrapure (Type I, 18 M&Omega;) water </td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="sepgelWaterVol">&nbsp;</span></td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="stackgelWaterVol">&nbsp;</span></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" rowspan="2"><input name="APSconc"
   type="text" size="3" maxlength="5"
		value="10" />% ammonium&nbsp;persulfate </td>
  <td><input name="APSfinalconc" size="4" value="0.05" />%</td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="sepgelAPSvol">&nbsp;</span></td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="stackgelAPSvol">&nbsp;</span></td></tr>
	<tr><td colspan="2"
	style="height:0.8em;color:maroon;font-size:85%;margin:0 10%;">
 <span id="totalAPSvol">&nbsp;</span>
 <input type="hidden" name="APSmass" value="10" />
 <input type="hidden" name="APSvol" value="100" /></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3">TEMED </td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="sepgelTEMEDvol">&nbsp;</span></td>
	<td style="text-align:center;"><span id="stackgelTEMEDvol">&nbsp;</span></td></tr>
</table>
<div style="float:left;margin-top:0;">
<button type="button" id="SDScalcButton"
	style="font-size:135%;">Calculate</button></div>
<p style="text-align:right;margin-top:0;">
<button type="button" id="showSDSexample" style="font-size:105%;">Show Example</button> </p>
<p style="width:45em;font:normal 85% Helvetica,sans-serif;">
* crosslinker is typically <i>N,N&prime;</i>-methylene-<i>bis</i>-acrylamide,
 but may be piperazine diacrylamide (PDA) or
 <i>N,N&prime;</i>-diallyl-tartardiamide (DATD)
<br />
&dagger; Note that a 20% T solution is usually only used in DNA-separating
gels, not protein-separating gels </p>
</div>

<div id="SDS-PAGE-detailed-help" style="display:none;">

<div style="float:right;">
<button type="button" id="closeSDSPageDetailedHelp">Close Help</button>
</div>

<p style="font:bold 105% Verdana,Arial,sans-serif;color:maroon;">
Instructions  </p>

<p style="margin-top:0.75em;">
This module is supposed to take the difficulty of remembering the individual
components of SDS-PAGE gels (as done by Laemmli) and the volumes necessary for
pipetting them.  There are basically two gels in this system.  A
<b>separating</b> (also called <b>resolving</b> or <b>running</b>) gel, in which
the proteins are separated, and a <b>stacking</b> gel, in which proteins in
solution in the well at the start of electrophoresis are concentrated into a
tight band before entering the separating gel.  Each gel has its own column both
for entry of input values and for display of calculated volumes. </p>

<p>
<b>User-required inputs</b>.  Wherever a user input is required or allowed, an
<i>input textbox</i> is a form control offered to the user.  For each gel the
user must enter a <b>final percentage</b>. For example, if the user is going to
run a 10% gel, then the value <b>10</b> should be entered in the <b>Final
percentage</b> textbox under <b>Resolving/Separating/Running Gel</b>.  Note that
a default value of <b>4%</b> is indicated for the <b>Stacking</b> gel; although
this is typical, it can be changed. </p>

<p>
The <b>Final volume</b> of gels can either be given by the user directly or
computed indirectly from a number of inputs given which include the count of
gels and the height, width, and depth of the gel dimensions. Note that when
calculating volumes, a pipetting error can be applied to the calculations.
Click the checkbox at the top of the table columns where it indicates <b>In
volume calculations, add </b>&lt;<i>error value</i> &gt; <b>for pipetting
error</b>.  A typical value of <b>15%</b> is a default entry. </p>

<p>
There are also five inputs for solution concentration values. Typical values are
entered by default but can be changed.  The Tris solutions are usually 4&times;
stocks.  Note that the final (gel) concentrations of Tris, SDS, ammonium
persulfate, and TEMED can <strong>not</strong> be controlled, since these values
are fixed in the method of Laemmli and important for SDS-PAGE. For
acrylamide/crosslinker (crosslinker is usually <i>bis-acrylamide</i>) a list of
typical acryalmide concentrations is given.  Only the total (T) concentration is
actually used to calculate the final percentage. </p>

</div>

<div style="margin-top:3em;">
With the exception of the total polyacrylamide concentration, the final
concentration of components in the gel is immutable:

<ul>
<li>Separating gel buffer:  0.375 M TrisHCl, pH 8.8 </li>
<li>Stacking gel buffer:  0.125 M TrisHCl, pH 6.8 </li>
<li>SDS concentration in both gels:  0.1% SDS </li>
<li>Ammonium persulfate concentration in both gels:  0.05% APS </li>
<li>TEMED concentration:  0.05% in the resolving, 0.1% in the stacking </li>
</ul>

<p>
This is because these values were determined by the work of Laemmli
(<i>Nature:London</i> <b>227</b>: 680, 1970).  See <a href="#SDSmodif">below</a>
for an explanation of the many variations of the SDS-PAGE system. </p>

<p>
Note that the electrode (running) buffer of 25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine and 0.1%
SDS is always made up by dissolving the following in distilled water, and
bringing it to a final 1.0 liter volume: </p>

<ul>
<li>3.0 g Tris (base) </li>
<li>14.4 g glycine </li>
<li>10 ml of 10% SDS or 1 g SDS </li>
</ul>

<p>
There is no need to adjust the pH of the electrode buffer (it will be
approximately 8.3). </p>

<p>
The acrylamide/crosslinker concentration is expressed usually as a %T / %C,
where %T is the total weight per volume of the acrylamide and the crosslinker
and the %C is the weight per weight of the crosslinker as a proportion of the
acrylamide plus the crosslinker:  </p>

<table class="eqnserif" style="font-size:85%;margin:1em auto;">
<tr><td rowspan="2">%T = </td>
 <td style="border-bottom:1px solid black;">grams acrylamide + grams
  crosslinker </td>
 <td rowspan="2">&times; 100 </td></tr>
<tr><td>total volume (ml) </td></tr>
</table>

<table class="eqnserif" style="font-size:85%;">
<tr><td rowspan="2">%C = </td>
 <td style="border-bottom:1px solid black;">grams crosslinker </td>
 <td rowspan="2">&times; 100 </td></tr>
<tr><td>grams acrylamide + grams crosslinker</td></tr>
</table>

<p>
However, the weight per volume of acrylamide and of the crosslinker (bis) is
also usually provided: thus a 30% T solution is shown as 29:1, or 29 grams
acryamide and 1 gram bis per 100 ml solution. Note that the %C is 3.3 = 1 / (29
+ 1). </p>

<p>
The final gel percentage, whether it is an 8, 10, or 12% is always an
expression of the %T of the solution during polymerization. Thus a 10% gel will
be a one-third dilution of a 30% stock, or a one-fourth dilution of a 40% stock,
irrespective of the proportion of crosslinker (%C). </p>

<p>
U. K. Laemmli used 30% acrylamide (30 g/100 ml) and 0.8% (0.8 g/100 ml) <i>N,
N&prime;</i>-<i>bis</i>-methyleneacrylamide, or 37.5 g acrylamide for each 1 g
<i>bis</i> (37.5:1) in his original formulation, which has not changed at all.
Note that %C = 0.8 g / (30 g + 0.8 g) = 2.6% C. For a 40% T stock solution, the
<i>bis</i> is (40 g/100 ml)(0.026) = 1.04 g/100 ml, and the acrylamide is (40.0
g &minus; 1.04 g)/100 ml = 39.0 g/100 ml. </p>

<h1 id="SDSmodif">Notes and Variations on SDS-PAGE</h1>

<p>
Scientists have used a great many variations on the SDS-PAGE system, and there
are some important things to note: </p>

<ul>
<li>If SDS-PAGE is used preparatively, such as for immunoblotting or gel
excision to MALDI-MS, it is important to cast the gel a few hours before its
use, so that the gel can <q>cure</q>:  freshly polymerized gels are thought to
have too many free radicals (persulfate) present which can react with proteins.
However this has been disputed by some, who say that the free radicals are
negatively charged and will move ahead of the proteins. </li>

<li>The final percentage of APS and TEMED in the monomer solution varies a great
deal.  U. K. Laemmli used 0.025% (w/v) APS and 0.025% (v/v) TEMED in his original
widely cited paper.  However, Bio-Rad recommends users of its systems  </li>

<li>A great many are leaving SDS out of the stacking and separating gels.  This
allows cast gels to be storable for longer periods, and the idea is that the SDS
present in the sample buffer and electrode buffer keeps the proteins exposed
continuously to the proper concentration of SDS, and that SDS has a significant
mobility and would distribute in the gels anyway. </li>
<li>Commercial pre-cast gels with a stacking and separating gel put pH 8.8 Tris
buffer in both gels rather than pH 6.8 Tris in the stacking. The reason is that
mixing of the buffers in the different gels occurs rapidly because of diffusion,
and stacking occurs anyway if the sample buffer itself is pH 6.8. </li>
</ul>
</div>
</form>


<div id="MWcalculator" style="background-color:#e0ffe0;padding:1em;"> <!-- log MW vs. Rm calculator -->
<form id="LogMWvRM" action="#">
<table id="SDS-MW-Calculator" style="float:left;margin-right:1em;">
<tr><th>Marker # </th><th>MW  </th><th>Rm or Travel </th></tr>
<tr><td>1 </td>
	<td><input id="M1MW" name="M1MW" size="6" maxlength="8" /> </td>
   <td><input id="M1Rm" name="M1Rm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td>2 </td>
	<td><input id="M2MW" name="M2MW" size="6" maxlength="8" /> </td>
   <td><input id="M2Rm" name="M2Rm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td>3 </td>
	<td><input id="M3MW" name="M3MW" size="6" maxlength="8" /> </td>
   <td><input id="M3Rm" name="M3Rm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td>4 </td>
	<td><input id="M4MW" name="M4MW" size="6" maxlength="8" /> </td>
   <td><input id="M4Rm" name="M4Rm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td>5 </td>
	<td><input id="M5MW" name="M5MW" size="6" maxlength="8" /> </td>
   <td><input id="M5Rm" name="M5Rm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td>6 </td>
	<td><input id="M6MW" name="M6MW" size="6" maxlength="8" /> </td>
   <td><input id="M6Rm" name="M6Rm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td>7 </td>
	<td><input id="M7MW" name="M7MW" size="6" maxlength="8" /> </td>
   <td><input id="M7Rm" name="M7Rm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td>8 </td>
	<td><input id="M8MW" name="M8MW" size="6" maxlength="8" /> </td>
   <td><input id="M8Rm" name="M8Rm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td>9 </td>
	<td><input id="M9MW" name="M9MW" size="6" maxlength="8" /> </td>
   <td><input id="M9Rm" name="M9Rm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="font-size:90%;">Dye Front: </td>
   <td><input id="FrontRm" name="FrontRm" size="4" maxlength="4" /> </td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="font:normal 80% Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif;text-align:left;">
Type of fit:  <br />
  <input type="radio" name="fit-type" value="linear" checked="checked" /> Linear
  <input type="radio" name="fit-type" value="polynomial" /> Polynomial </td>
  	<td><button type="reset">Clear Form</button> <br />
     <button id="exampleSDSPlot" type="button">
		<span	style="font-size:80%;color:blue;">Show Example</span>
	</button>
</td></tr>
</table>
<ol>
<li> Enter the MW of the protein standard you used in the gel.  The order of entry
does not matter (no need to sort from increasing to decreasing or vice-versa). </li>
<li> Enter either the <i>R</i><sub>m</sub> value or the distance the marker band
traveled starting from the top of the gel (the dimensions/units do not matter,
so long as you always measure in the same units).  If you decide to enter the
distance traveled, you must also enter the distance that the dye front traveled
in the entry boi>Choose the type line fit you want.  A graph will be presented showing
the plotted points and line fit.  This may be informative. </li>
<li>To determine the MW of an unknown band or spot, enter the <i>R</i><sub>m</sub>
or the distance traveled.  The Estimated MW should appear below. </li>
</ol>
<p>
Notes:</p>
<ul>
<li>The <i>R</i><sub>m</sub>, or <i>relative mobility</i>, is the fraction that
a protein band or spot travels in SDS-PAGE relative to the dye front.  By
definition, it must be a value between 0 and 1.  For example, suppose in a mini-gel
the BSA (66 kDa) marker moves 2.7 cm and the dye front moves 6.2 cm from the
start (top) of the resolving gel.  The BSA <i>R</i><sub>m</sub> thus is
2.7 cm / 6.2 cm = 0.435.  The system is generally smart enough to know the difference
between values entered being <i>R</i><sub>m</sub> or distance travelled. </li>
<li>Errors or irregularities will be noted when possible.  It is the responsibility
of the user to make careful entries since error checking is not rigorous. </li>
<li>The principle of electrophoresis should work for protein and DNA gels.
For MW you can enter the bases (base pairs), and the Rm value should be the
same. </li>
</ul>

<p style="clear:both;margin:1em 0;">
Enter Unknown Band/Spot Rm or Travel:
	<input name="SampleRm" size="4" maxlength="4" id="updateSDSParams" /></p>
<p>
Estimated Molecular Weight:  <span id="estMW"
style="border:2px solid red;width:5em;">&nbsp;</span></p>
</form>
</div>
</div> <!-- id=sds-page -->

</body>
</html>