<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<!-- ============================
           Solutions
	============================ -->
<head>
<title>Solution Chemistry Calculations</title>
<link href="./Solutions.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>

<body>
<div id="solutions-page">

<button id="soln-help-button" type="button" style="border:none;background:none;"
  onmouseover="this.style.color='red';" onmouseout="this.style.color='';">Instructions?</button>
    <!-- click="SolutionChemistry.solnhelp();" -->
<form id="solnForm" action="#">


<!--
	qsoln is entire form of 3 panels
-->
<table id="qsoln">
 <tr>
	<!-- left panel TD -->
	<td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">

  <table id="chempanel">
	<!-- Suppose to show chemicals, forumula weight, selection -->
	<tr>
		<td id="MolDisplay"></td>  <!-- display for molecule -->
		<td> FW&nbsp;=&nbsp;
			<input type="text" size="6" name="FWdis" id="FWdisplay" disabled="disabled"/>
					<input type="hidden" id="selected-compound" />
		</td>
	</tr>
	<tr><td colspan="2"><table id="chemlist-table"></table></td></tr>
	   <!-- insert the list of chemicals in above table, use class=chemitem for each -->
   <tr><td colspan="2" id="formula-weights">&nbsp;</td></tr>
	 <tr><td class="tblrowhdr" colspan="2" id="other-header-rule">
		<!-- Molecular formula required in text box -->  &nbsp;
	 </td></tr>
	 <tr><td colspan="2">
     <input id="calcFW-radio" type="radio" value="other"/>Other:&nbsp;&nbsp;
	  <!-- click="SolutionChemistry.calcFW(this);"  -->
		 <input type="text" size="15" maxlength="30" name="custom" id="other-textbox-calcFW"/>
			<!--  change="calcFW(this);" -->
	   <div id="soln-help-button-container">
       <button id="another-soln-help">?</button>
		 <!-- click="SolutionChemistry.solnhelp();" -->
     </div>
	  <span id="not-recognized">Not Recognized</span>
	  <span id="unknown-char">Unknown Character<br />(See Help)</span>
	  <span id="no-space-char">No Space Character<br />(See Help)</span>
	</td></tr>
	</table> </td> <!-- id=chemlist -->
	<!-- middle panel TD -->
 <td id="solndens-tbl-td-container">
	<table id="solndens" class="solnfactor">
	 <tr><td id="soln-dens-desired-conc-val" colspan="4">Enter
	      the desired solution density (concentration) and indicate the dimensions:
      </td></tr>
	 <tr><td rowspan="2" style="width:8em;">
		<!-- textbox for value for concenttration -->
	   <input type="text" id="concVal" name="concVal" class="numvalue" size="8" maxlength="8" /></td>
	  <td id="soln-dens-units-label" colspan="3">Units:</td></tr>
	 <tr>
    <td style="padding:0.2em;width:12em;">
	   <input type="radio" name="cmassDim" value="uG" />&micro;G&nbsp;(micrograms)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="cmassDim" value="mG" />mG&nbsp;(milligrams)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="cmassDim" value="_G" />G&nbsp;(grams)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="cmassDim" value="kG" />kG&nbsp;(kilograms)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="cmassDim" value="umol" />&micro;mol&nbsp;(micromoles)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="cmassDim" value="mmol" />mmol&nbsp;(millimoles)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="cmassDim" value="_mol" checked="checked" />mol&nbsp;(moles) </td>
	  <td style="padding:0.2em;"><strong>per</strong> </td>
	  <td style="padding:0.2em;width:8em;">
	   <input type="radio" name="cvolDim" value="uL" />&micro;L&nbsp;(microliter)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="cvolDim" value="mL" />mL&nbsp;(milliliter)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="cvolDim" value="_L" checked="checked" />L&nbsp;(liter) </td></tr>
	</table> <!-- id=solndens --> </td>
<!-- right panel TD -->
 <td style="vertical-align:top;">
	<table id="vol" class="solnfactor">
	 <tr><td colspan="2" style="background-color:#cfc;">Enter the
			final volume of your solution: </td></tr>
	 <tr><td rowspan="2" style="text-align:right;">
		<!-- textbox for value for volume of solution  -->
	    <input type="text" id="solnVolVal" name="solnVolVal" class="numvalue" size="8" maxlength="8" /> </td>
	  <td id="vol-units-label">Units:</td></tr>
	 <tr><td >
	   <input type="radio" name="svolDim" value="uL" />&micro;L&nbsp;(microliter)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="svolDim" value="mL" />mL&nbsp;(milliliter)<br />
	   <input type="radio" name="svolDim" value="_L" checked="checked" />L&nbsp;(liter) </td></tr>
	</table> <!-- id=vol -->
	<table id="versions">
	 <tr>
    <td><input type="radio" name="version" value="short" />short version </td>
		<td><input type="radio" name="version" checked="checked" value="long" />long version </td></tr>
	 <tr>
    <td colspan="2">
     <button type="button" name="calc" id="calcsoln-report">Give me the lowdown</button> </td></tr>
	   <!-- click="SolutionChemistry.calcsoln(this.form);" -->
	</table> </td></tr>
<!-- end of panels -->
 <tr>
  <td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
   <table style="width:100%;">
    <tr><td rowspan="2"> </td></tr>
   </table>
   <!--  SOLUTION INSTRUCTIONS -->
   <div id="solnerror" class="errors"></div>
   <div id="solninstruct"> <!-- Large div to contain instructions -->
    <div id="solnguide"></div> <!-- where the guid is writtne -->
   	<span id="solnprintable">
    		<input type="button" name="printbox" value="Give me a printable version"
				id="printable-version-click"/>
			<!--  click="printable(document.getElementById('solnguide').innerHTML);"-->
			<br/>
			<span id="solnguide-span">
				<span style="color:red;">Note</span>
		     		Pressing this button opens a new window
			</span>
		</span> <!-- solnprintable -->
   </div> <!-- id="solninstruct" --> </td></tr>
</table> <!-- id=qsoln -->
	<div>
    <button type="button" id="show-examples">Show Examples</button>
	 <!-- click="SolutionChemistry.solutionExamples(this.form);" -->
	</div>
</form>
</div> <!-- id="solutions-page" -->

<!--
Used to make long version in page and printable version
-->
<div id="longversion">
<span id="print-button-span"><button id="print-button">Print</button></span>
Please read the following steps to prepare your solution:

<ol>
<li>Weigh out on a balance accurate to the nearest <span id="nearest"></span>
exactly <span id="exactmass"></span> of <span id="substsym1"></span>
<span id="substname"></span> </li>

<li>Pour (or weigh) the <span id="substsym2"></span> into either:
 <ul>
 <li>a <span id="cylvol"></span> graduated cylinder if you have
a PTFE (Teflon)-coated magnetic stirring bar that comfortably fits
into and spins in the graduate cylinder and which can mix the
entire solution at full volume in the with a reasonably viewable vortex or, </li>
 <li>a <span id="beakervol"></span> beaker containing the proper
Teflon-coated stir bar. </li>
  </ul>
Before adding the <span id="substsym3"></span>, fill your container with
approximately <span id="firstfill"></span> <span id="volunits"></span> (about
80% of the final volume) with water of the proper quality (see elsewhere for a
discussion of proper water quality). </li>

<li>Begin stirring on a magnetic stirrer to dissolve the <span id="substsym4">
</span>. For certain salts, dissolution is aided by slight (40-50&deg;C) or
even moderate (as much as 80-90&deg;C) heating. Don't be so quick to use
heating however since it will be necessary to cool the solution prior to adding
the remaining amount of water to the final volume; note the temperature etched
on the glass of the vessel container is the temperature at which the solution
and solvent must be for the final addition of water to produce the accurate
concentration. Another reason to avoid heating is if the chemical is
heat-sensitive and destroyed or altered above a certain temperature. </li>

<li>When the substance has dissolved (there may be insoluble impurities present
however) to the best of your experience, then q.s. (add water) to the mark
representing the final volume. Note that the bottom of of the meniscus at the
air-water interface must align with the mark The final concentration of the
solution will be accurate if the temperature of the solution is at the
temperature marked on the glass of the container, plus or minus 5&deg;C. </li>

<li>If the entire volume of the solution is not used immediately and it is
intended that the solution is to be a working stock solution to be stored and
used from from time to time, obtain an appropriate container for storage. If
the substance is light-sensitive, it is especially important to use a container
that reduces or even eliminates the transmission of room light through the
container wall into the solution. A dark brown glass container is adequate for
most purposes where light sensitivity is a consideration; alternatively, any
glass container wrapped well in something like aluminum foil is sufficient. The
bottle cap and its seal should be nonreactive with the solution. Be suspicious
of using solutions where inspection of the material of the bottle cap seal
shows it has disintegrate or been discolored possibly because of contact or the
presence of the solution. Use appropriately non-reactive storage vessels with
particularly corrosive solutions. </li>

</ol>
<p>
The bottles of all solutions should absolutely be labeled properly.
Proper labeling prevents losses and waste that add to the supply costs
of the laboratory when improper labeling requires discarding of
substances whose contents or concentrations are unknown.  There is
also a safety factor, since certain chemicals are hazardous and must
be discarded in hazardous waste containers (as opposed to dumping into
the sink);  hazardous waste disposal is very expensive, all the more
so when one is using the service to discard a chemical that is harmless
and disposed of by less expensive (or cost-free) means.  Proper labeling
requires printing in block letters large enough to be seen several feet
away first the concentration then the name of the substance:
A date (in short form) should be written as well.  The initials
the person preparing the solution may be useful or necessary as well,
perhaps in accordance with policy of a multi-member lab or to identify
ownership, etc.</p>
<p>
Each solution has a certain shelf or storage life when stored in
ideal conditions and when volumes are sampled properly.  Where information
regarding the life and usefulness of solutions is insufficient,
experience will fill the void. </p>
</div> <!-- id="longversion" -->
</body>

</html>